You know what's going on.
Welcome to the first actual tutorial for limit less calculus.
Thank you for being here.
And the fact that you're here means you care about your education and that you want to pass this class.
You want to make sure that business calculus will be something of a memory in the past and I'll help
you do that.
All right.
So we'll go over a lot of concepts.
We'll go over a lot of fun mnemonics.
We'll go over a lot of problems to make sure that you're ready and that you're good to go.
Today we're going to talk about something that's critical.
The foundation really for calculus.
You need to know what a function is.
You need to know how they work.
You're going to see functions starting now until the end of the course you're going to see functions
in every single problem.
So I'll give you a way to quickly remember what a function is you know do some analogies and we'll take
it from there.
So like I said functions are a part of the foundation of calculus and it is very important to understand
what they are and how they work.
So to better understand what a function is and how they're used in business calculus Let's use an analogy.
Let me ask you a question.
When you think of a machine what do you think about what does a machine do.
So let's say we have a machine over here.
OK.
So I know you love the drawing of a beautiful machine.
I know it's actually and you don't have to tell me it's all right.
So think of a machine what does the machine do.
Well machine what it does is it receives an input
and it gives you back an output.
OK so you put an input into it.
It does something to that input and it gives you back an output.
OK.
So inside this machine there's some sort of process that goes on
that converts input into a specific output and let's do a quick analogy.
In fact I want you to think of a washing machine.
So how does a washing machine work.
What it does is it takes clothes and detergent and fabric softener.
If you're a fan you look at them as input.
It applies a washing process to it and it gives you back wet clean clothes.
So let's represent that process here specifically with the washing machine.
Again my drawing skills are not the best.
So please bear with me.
Let's assume that this is a washing machine.
So the input that it takes is close let's call it dirty clothes to be more specific.
It gives us back Queen clothes
Queen
clothes and of course there's a washing process that's in here.
Which basically means the clothes.
So this is a washing machine and put it over here.
All right.
So that is a good analogy for what we're all going to be working with for functions.
In other words again you would take an input which is in this case of a washing machine it's dirty clothes.
We apply a washing process to dirty clothes and we end up with clean clothes.
So what does this have to do with a function in calculus.
Well what actually happens is that a function works basically like a washing machine.
So we function
innocence is a washing machine
I know it sounds very silly but I'll bet you you're not going to forget this right.
Every time you see a function you're going to think Oh that's right a washing machine dirty clothes
washing process clean clothes.
So it is similar to a washing machine in the sense that a function also takes an input overhear dirty
clothes it applies a process to it and then it gives you back an output.
So let me write this down for you.
OK so here we have it a function receives an input.
Apply a process and returns an output.
So we take something in it does something to that input and it gives you back a result.
So here's an example of a function in the words Graben number add 5 to it and return it.
Let me put that here.
As an example
and again we're doing this in words so we're saying grab number
add 5 to it
return output.
So what happens if we give a number to this function.
What happens if we give it three.
So if we give it three we apply the process the process says grabber number it's 3 5 2 it gives us 8
3 plus 5 is 8 and then return the output that would give us 8 but we pick another number.
What if we pick ten Well we put 10 through the same process.
We grab a number which is 10.
We had five to it.
And we return an output that gives us 15 still one more.
What if we have negative 3
so we grab a number negative 3.
We had five.
Two it was negative three plus five.
Well if you owe three dollars and then you pay five back you staying positive.
So that gives you positive to and return the output which is true.
So as you can see for every input that you have you have some sort of output associated to it and the
process in this case is to add five to whatever number you were given.
That is the essence of a function.
Again a function gets something it does something to that something and then it gives you something
back.
In other words it takes an input.
It applies a process to that input and it gives you an output of function does manipulate whatever you
feed into it and give you something back.
So that said let's go over something very important.
The input of a function is usually called X and the output is called Y.
We'll cover that notation next.
So we all function in words such as take a number add 5 to it and then return it.
What is the mathematical notation for functions.
In other words how do you know a function when you see one as mentioned in Gen X is the input of a function.
And why is the output so X is input
and why is the output
so x and y are pretty much placeholders they're used before we know the actual input and the actual
output and something else.
Is that a function is typically given in this form y equals F X.
This is what a function looks like.
And when you look at this it might seem a little bit weird but it actually makes sense.
Remember that X is the input.
So when you say F of eggs you're saying you're going to give X to this rule f and that's going to give
you back a Y value.
OK.
Again X is the input.
Why is the output you give X to this rule f that's going to do something to it.
And then that's going to return a y value that is y y equals f of x.
So going back to her washing machine analogy this would mean the following
clean clothes
equals
washing process.
Apply to what.
To the input which is dirty clothes.
See this is why this is your output the clean clothes.
This is X your dirty clothes where your input and this is the rule f that you apply to the input.
So you take your dirty clothes you apply the washing process and they give you back clean clothes OK.
So one more thing I wanted to mention this is the typical notation you will see for a function y equals
f of x but it's not the only one.
So sometimes for different quantities we use different letters.
So for example in physics we have something like the equals f of T.
Because we're plugging in time and that's going to give us our velocity.
And again it could be you know random letters like equals
and it really doesn't matter.
The point is when you see something like this in this form why equals f of x.
So a letter equals f of something else another letter.
You know you're plug in in this input and you're applying this rule to get this output.
So if you see something different with a different letter that's not why you cause of X to not worry
it's going to be still a function if it is in this form.
OK.
All right so now we're going to talk a little bit about how we actually work with functions.
So when you're given a function in a problem sometimes you might not see the why.
So for example you might be given something like this for VAX equals
x plus three.
So many times again you're not going to see the y equals f of x you're just going to see f of x equals
to something else.
So what is this telling you this is telling you the actual rule that you're going to apply to your input.
So in this case f of x.
So the rule that's being applied to x is equal to x plus 3.
This means that you're going to grab X and you're going to add three to it.
All right so let's see this play.
Let's try to build a small table.
You know something like this.
Here we have are X and here we have our Y.
Remember X is input.
Why is the output.
So by the way the way you plug in stuff into a function is you actually substitute the eggs by the number
that you're plugging in.
Remember that X is a placeholder for input.
So let's say we want to plug in 1.
Notice the difference.
We used to have an X which is the generic function and now we have a half of 1.
So we were actually applying one to this rule.
So we substitute the X by the 1.
So it becomes one plus three equals for so the input was one the output was for.
Let's try another number of zero.
What if we plug in zero into this function.
Well if we plug in zero we have zero plus three equals three
is zero for input and 3 for output.
Remember these are read like this.
So this is one result.
This is another results.
This is the point.
Well actually yeah they're actually called points.
So this point one for remember this is your X and this is your why this other point is 0 3 etc.
Let's try working with another function.
So what do we have for X equals x squared.
Interesting.
So what we need to do is we need to plug in numbers and square them let's build another table here.
To keep track of what we plug in
so what do we plug in.
Three into half of X over here.
Well we're going to have three squared which is equal to nine.
So for the input three our output is nine.
So let's try another.
So let's try another value of five.
So that's five squared that's just five times five which is 25.
So for the input 5 our output is going to be 25 and you can just keep plugging values in and then and
then and then and you're going to get a whole table full of values.
So something you've noticed here is that so every time you put a number into a function so you plug
in for example 3 into this function x squared you're going to get one result back and only one.
It's never going to happen that you're going to plug in three into this function and you're going to
get one result one time and a different result another time.
In other words three squared is always going to be nine.
And that is one characteristic of functions.